---
draft: "true"
pubDate: Jul 25 2025
description: Are some ideas more fundamental than others
title: There are No Fundamental Ideas
---
# Intro

I see a pattern in a lot of philosophy that I find boring, a search for the most 'fundamental' ideas. I do not believe that there is such a thing, and I find that this belief prompts a lot of less-than-useful ways of thinking. I am going to write about why I don't like this way of thinking, and hopefully suggest an alternative. I don't know if what I am saying is new, but I have not seen it phrased exactly like this. For some background thinking, I have been reading a lot of Brandom, Lakatos, Feyerabend, and a little bit of Kuhn. I have also been having conversations with some very smart people who seem, to me, to be saying manifest nonsense. I would like to try to explain what I find nonsensical about these statements, in my own terms.

In the first section, I will try to identify what I mean by fundamental, and try to separate it from other, similar ways we might try to construct some partial order on ideas (such as being logically prior, pragmatically prior, generality, abstractness, normative bindingness, etc.) In the next section, I will try to explain why I think that this is a bad way of thinki with some compelling examples where an assumption of fundamentality has caused unstated, incorrect ideas to creep into an actual philosopher's writing. Finally, I will explain some alternatives to this worldview, and gesture towards fruitful dialogue in a post-fundamentality world. 

# What do I mean by Fundamental?

A pattern in a lot of philosophy involves setting up a hierarchy of ideas in terms of how fundamental they are. Ordinary language, experience, and most non-philosophical thought is somewhere at the bottom, and progress is made by ascending the ladder towards the single (or very few) most fundamental ideas. The thing that makes these ideas fundamental is rarely clear. Indeed, for many hierarchies of fundamentality, we may only learn about what basis we have for their construction after the fundamental ideas have been discovered, at which point they will be revealed to always already been at the top of our hierarchy. 

There are obvious reasons why people believe this, ordinary language biases us towards this kind of thinking. Whenever something happens, someone gives some reason for doing something, or whenever we are investigating why two ideas were put in chronological order in a piece of writing, we can always ask "why did that happen?" and expect an interesting answer. When a child asks why a rock falls, we can give an answer in terms of a simple explanation of gravity. When they respond with a question about why gravity happens, we can give an even more interesting explanation in terms of space time, and by the time the third why has been asked, we have arrived near the limits of human knowledge. At each step of the discussion, we increased the generality and importance of our answers, and, indeed, the simpler replies were in some sense 'swallowed up' by the later answers. This can be done in many more domains of knowledge than the natural sciences, asking "why?" three or four times to almost any well-understood proposition will lead to increasingly general, contentfull, and interesting responses. Given this common phenomena, it is easy to assume that this is what knowledge looks like in general.

However, I do not believe that this is the case. Though there are many interesting ways that ideas can be ordered in terms of these why questions, there does not seem to be any reason to assume that there is only one thing at the top of these hierarchies, or that they are all secretly part of the same, much larger hierarchy of ideas. Indeed, this peculiar feature is what I take to be the defining flaw of the hierarchical mode of thinking: the idea that there must be some single way of ordering ideas that we, as philosophers or physicists or mathematicians must set out to discover, and that this ultimate order of things is already being pointed by our non-fundamental ideas. 

To make it even more clear, I will define 'fundamentality' as a property of any system of ordering ideas that 
- 1) only has room for a single idea at the top, or a small set of equally-fundamental ideas.
- 2) believes that every less fundamental idea can be cashed out in terms of these more fundamental ones.
- 3) that every idea is either 'already' contained within the fundamental ideas or is nonsense.

## Fundamentalism in Philosophy of Math

For example, there are two different perspectives on what mathematical statements mean. The first is sometimes called 'if-then-ism,' and the second I will call 'axiomatic realism.' If-then-ism holds that mathematics is the study of statements of the form 'if XYZ then ABC.' As in, if some properties are true, here are some other properties that must also be true. Axiomatic realism takes this belief a step further, claiming that certain statements *are* true, along with every statement that follows. I am calling axiomatic realism fundamentalist even though it does not imply that all statements are secretly mathematical in nature. A ordering of ideas need not apply to every idea to be fundamentalist, but those three qualities need to hold over every idea it applies to.

Axiomatic realism, the belief that mathematical statements are true in terms of an undoubtable set of necessarily true statements, is fundamentalist. 1) holds because there cannot be an infinite number of axioms, 2) holds because a statement is only true if it follows from the axioms, which also means that every mathematical proposition can be rewritten in set-theoretic language. 3) is more debatable, though if you believe in the first two, I find it difficult to imagine that one would believe that Euclid or Archimedes weren't mathematicians, or that their theorems weren't proven until we formalized them in modern, set-theoretic language, so something like it should hold. 

Older versions of if-then-ism usually were phrased with the understanding that XYZ would be something along the lines of "the axioms of set theory." This older version is clearly compatible with axiomatic realism. More modern versions tend to believe that allegiance to a particular systems of axioms is not needed. Here, the XYZ is usually filled with things like 'abelian groups' or 'functions from $\mathbb{R}^n$ to $\mathbb{R}^m$,' as in, '*if* something is an abelian group *then* it can be identified with a module over the ring of integers.'

Modern if-then-ism is not fundamentalist, indeed, it would be incoherent to suggest that there is some overarching statement that applied to every single construction. Rendered in if-then-ist language, a fundamental statement would be trivial, along with any predicate that is always true. If-then-ism imagines math as a search for relationships. The more narrow, intricate, and expressive the conditions on the left are, the more information they give us to develop richer equivalences with the conclusions on the right. Though modern math is internally self-consistent, this is not because we have found the correct set of axioms (though formal systems are undoubtably useful in proving theorems), but because mathematicians have moved away from fundamentalism. Questions such as "are there nonzero numbers smaller than every fraction?" have been answered, not by finding the one true definition of the real numbers, but by enabling the response of "it depends on the other properties you want these numbers to have."

## And in Logic

Though very few philosophers of math buy into axiomatic realism, fundamental thinking shows up in contemporary philosophy of logic. For instance, many philosophers of logic assume, incorrectly, that they are engaged in an explication of truth. This is partially true. There are several ways that we use the word 'true,' some of which may be compatible while others are contradictory. For instance, formalisms of truth have revealed that hypotheticals can be formalized as the material conditional, a fairly simple truth-functional connective. Counterfactuals, which appear very similar in ordinary language, are best expressed in terms of modal logic, and have no real truth-functional formalization. Given the successes we have had formalizing different kinds of truth, it seems almost reasonable to assume that we will eventually arise at a formalism to end all formalism, a coherent way to express every aspect of truth that we ought be interested in.

