---
draft: "true"
pubDate: Jun 6 2025
description: How can we do that
title: Why it's immoral to be a moral realist
---
I have some thoughts about Sartre, and I would like to set them straight. I think he is my favorite ethicist, and I think that his controversial phraseology is why so many people dismiss him, but the core insight of his philosophy is extraordinarily important. 

I wanna begin with how I think you should frame his philosophy. Its worth setting the scene. When Nazi's fought, they did so with the words "God is with us" inscribed on their uniforms. The intelligentsia had decided that eugenics was the correct way to respond to disability, crime, and poverty. Though Eugenics would fall out of favor shortly after the war, by the standards of the time, the Nazi ideology was "correct." Philosophers like Heidegger gave serious defenses of lebensraum and the need for a nation to be racially unified. More realist philosophers, like Karl Schmidt, gave serious defenses illiberal nationalism. What, then, is a moral person to do? If someone has god, ethics, and the facts on their side, by whose standard could we judge them?

Put another way, if we imagine ourselves as people living at the time, where the propositions underlying Nazi ideology seem *true*, are we all to become Nazis? Though we know now that these ideas are false, we could not have known then. Can we only be moral in hindsight.

Some philosophers might be tempted to respond to these questions on their own terms, as in, refuting them proposition by proposition. This is not what Sartre decided to do, he was interested in how we could look at a group of people who had the facts and god himself on their side and still declare them monstrous. He wanted to know how one could stare down truth and give a full throated refusal to accede to its monstrous demands. 

Now that the standards of the debate have been set, we can talk more about how Sartre actually decided to argue against this. He proposed that morality, as classically understood, was entirely backwards. Traditional philosophers tend to look for moral principles in abstractions. Whenever someone does anything, we can always ask "why did you do that?" These questions will increase in generality and fundamentality. Eventually, we will be asking the question "why do anything at all," and the response could only be "well because it's good to do some things." Once we establish the good as a self-justifying justification (it makes no sense to ask "why be good," only "is that good"), we can reason backwards.

This is overwhelmingly common in moral realist philosophy, Kant says that the good is ultimately to be found in the "categorical imperative," or the thing that could logically bind everyone's actions. He gives various formulations of the imperative, but they are all talking about the same imperative. Philosophers like Mills identify the good with utility, a single unit of the highest abstract value, sometimes more crudely rendered as pleasure, but again, the most abstract means by which we could encode value in a state of affairs, utilitarianism is about maximizing the number of utils in the world, and an action is good if it moves us in the direction of more utils. 

Each of these philosophies treat morals like a recipe. Once we have the correct set of instructions, we can plug in our own contingent circumstances and discover the correct way to act in them. 

For Sartre, these kinds of systems are antithetical to morals. He believed that morality was, at base, about responsibility. We are, all of us, condemned to be responsible to ourselves. We are the ones acting, we choose how we take in the world, how we relate to the world of facts and values. We are "projecting" ourselves onto the world. From his perspective, these kinds of recipes for morality are nothing more than denying our projections, a way to pass the buck away from ourselves and toward the "fact" of our moral systems. If we find ourselves acting monstrously, we can say "this is justified, unfortunate as it is, because of these reasons." 

This is antithetical to his moral universe, and I think it should be antithetical to yours. For example, Sartre asks us to consider a genuine ethical dilemma. Not a trolly problem thought-experiment, designed to test a recipe, but a genuine, intractable problem. 

Imagine someone living in northern France early into WW2. They have a sick mother who requires near full-time care. They are unable to finance this care, and must provide it themselves. However, after the invasion of France, and the suffering that the Nazis are inflicting onto innocents, they find themselves compelled to join the resistance. What should they do?

This is Sartre's example of an intractable moral issue. The interesting question isn't which answer is correct, both are right, both are wrong. The question, for Sartre, is what should their decision making look like? Would we find this person more admirable if they responded to this situation with certainty? Is there any virtue in a moral system that renders this kind of decision a trivial one, a logical problem or a tallying of utility? No! This decision should leave anyone forced into it tired, anxious, nauseous. A righteous person would find themselves unable to bear the weight of such a decision. 

Now, finally, we can get to the actual content of Sartre's thought. The details of projection, nihilation, transcendence, or any of the other keywords in being and nothingness are  unimportant. They are less useful than the perspective that they try to get you to inhabit. 

The important concept is bad faith. We have two ways of looking at ourselves. We are either responsible to ourselves, or responsible to something else. When we work in a restaurant, attend a job interview, act out any predetermined moral or social script, we are in bad faith. We look at ourselves like a kind of imperfect automaton, trying, hopefully succeeding, but ultimately failing to live up to some external system of validation. This is as true of a utilitarian as it is of an employee as it is of a Nazi. We have denied our own responsibility. 

Much of the book is Sartre looking at the kinds of places that a "true" bad faith might come from. Maybe it's our community, they determine what kinds of moral systems are good and which are bad, maybe it's evolution, some dynamics hidden in the psyche, maybe it X, Y or even Z. In my opinion, the argumentation here leaves much to be desired. The actual reasons Sartre gives to reject these is his system of nihilation, where consciousness is interesting because it is the only thing that is non-identical to itself. A rock is always a rock, they persist in boring ways, even streams or whatever persist in some pattern-following sense. Our consciousness, however, does not persist in the way that our bodies do. Our body is more-or-less identical to what it was seconds ago, but our mind can freely wander, new ideas can occur spontaneously, it is not physical, and cannot be determined by anything physical. He also has (even less satisfying) reasons to reject logic as a final governing force of our psyche. 

All of his arguments, though, are designed to show that moral judgements are not the kind of thing that could ever be determined from without.

How, then, you might wonder, does Sartre say that we are in a position to condemn anyone? If there is no such thing as morality, what could we possibly say to someone who says that they have simply decided kill as many babies as possible. I think that this is the wrong question. WE are precisely the people who can do the condemning. If we are responsible for the babies, then we must prevent this person from doing their monstrous acts. The fact, the unfortunate, nauseating fact, is that we can never do so from a place of certainty. Intractable moral problems are not a rare case, they are indicative of any serious moral thought. We can say that it is good to do x, y, but we can never find ourselves totally sure of these things, and this is a good thing, because moral certainty is not to be sought after, it is the first step towards denying that we are our own causes, the most serious way that we can deny ourselves.